Okay, the tape is rolling.
In Menage Autre, Jason Ward, the hero, attends an autograph session and he didn't seem to
have very much fun there.
Did this arise out of real life experiences or are most of them a little more fun than
that?
Oh, I love autograph sessions.
I love it.
But it's easy to take it and, you know, if you were tired or you wanted to be somewhere
else, I've never had the experience of having an endless group of people come up and come
up and demanding my autograph, you know.
I go to autograph sessions that I've been to.
We figure if eight or twelve people come, everybody's very delighted.
I know that some mainstream authors I have read about get very unhappy at autograph sessions.
They get tired, you know.
When you read about the American Bookseller's Association of Conventions, usually they say
that the science fiction authors were among the most agreeable there who just kept signing
autographs and signing autographs and other people got really upset and cranky and so
forth and so on.
So it's easy to make up and, you know, we've all had experiences when we were doing something
that we wish we were something else so it's easy to take the situation and invent it.
It's very, as we're sitting there and signing good luck and best of wishes and et cetera,
et cetera, et cetera and asking them, how do you spell your name?
That I've been through.
I've learned that you always ask the person how to spell their name because sometimes
they spell it in very different ways.
And I've met authors who could think of very witty, very original things to write in every
book but I freeze up.
You know, I'm glad to sign my name but I can't be creative there on the spur of the moment
so I usually end up saying good luck, best wishes, best ever and do that repeatedly.
So that part was realistic.
Why are science fiction authors so accessible to the fans whereas as you mentioned in other genres,
they're not?
I have no idea.
I don't know.
I don't know if it's science fiction people or writing the thing because they love it.
I would think that most writers write because they love it.
But I just really don't know.
Maybe it's because more than science fiction people have a chance to know their fans on
the first name basis.
They meet them at conventions.
They get in the habit of socializing with the people that are reading their books and
other big name authors.
But maybe don't have that opportunity.
I just really don't know.
I'd like to ask you a couple of questions now just on the general nature of science fiction.
There are those who now claim that there's a glut of fantasy which is appearing and that
this glut of fantasy is appearing to the detriment of science fiction.
Do you have any observations on this, Pro-Recon?
There's a lot of fantasy.
I agree.
I don't know that it's the detriment of science fiction.
I think there's certainly room for both.
I think both fulfill needs of people.
I keep telling mundane kind of people, mainstream kind of people who ask about what do I purpose
or what good is science fiction.
And I keep saying people have always wanted myths.
They have always wanted wonderful creatures.
They sit around the campfire and they would fantasize about the creatures that lived in the next country.
Well, this whole planet, we know what's in the next country on this planet.
The monsters are in outer space or the myths can be in outer space.
They're also in inner space.
It's the same reason that I think that the vampires and horror stories have come up because that's where people can go to for myths now.
I don't know what it is in people that want these wonderful monsters, but they will have them.
They don't care if the world is settled, why they'll go back to the old fashioned ones.
The things that might exist, people that want to reach out can reach out for strange and wonderful creatures beyond space.
The ones that don't want to reach out can reach for the creatures in inner space.
I think it also has to do with a lot of the time.
The space of things are very complex. They're very frightening.
There are no clear cut rights and wrongs.
There's really no answers to lots of problems.
One answer raises a whole lot more problems.
Everything's so interlinked.
You raise employment and you do this and that and some of that is detrimental and so forth.
I don't want to say it's an escape. I don't want to put it down.
I don't read fantasy because I like to reach out.
Maybe it's because I'm a little more optimistic. I believe there will be a tomorrow.
I think people read fantasy because they can get away from all the grays.
Fantasy provides worlds where there are clear rights and clear wrongs
and where you can answer problems with a strong right arm and a magic sword and a pure heart.
I think that the heroic fantasy then gives people something to get away from.
A lot of the movies they were producing during the Depression
and a lot of books they were writing during the Depression adventure stories
were people to get away from the terrible things they had to face every day.
I think that's why there's a lot of fantasy.
I think there's a need for it and I think it's wonderful that it's there for the people who want it.
There's probably a lot of bad fantasy and a lot of junk fantasy
but you go on the mainstream shelf and there's certainly a lot of junk there
and I think that the work that is well written and the work that is good
will probably manage to sustain itself even as the junk comes and goes and passes away.
My engineer wants me to ask a question.
Hang on a second. What question?
Ask her if she thinks that I might have some sort of tie in with the boom in the fantasy role-playing game.
Okay. Do you think this has some sort of tie in with the boom in the fantasy role-playing games?
I think that they're both part and parcel of the same thing.
People who can play roles in fantasy games are being more actively involved in the fantasy
than just sitting there and reading it. They're living it in a sense.
And again, it's a way to be faced with problems that have clear solutions and rights and wrongs to them.
I think probably the fantasy up-search and the fantasy that people was reading,
people were reading King before the role-playing, but I think it's all part of the same thing.
In a way, it's discouraging, but I think it reflects a certain pessimism perhaps about the future.
Perhaps that's why I said that. Perhaps that's why I still like science fiction,
why that's what I write and that's what I read because I retain a certain optimism that somehow,
maybe not grandly or gloriously, people will survive.
I think we will perhaps even prevail. At least we'll limp along into the next century and the century after that
and the century after that. That's kind of what happens in my books.
You may have noticed that there are a lot of large social problems that exist within each book that never get solved,
but people in the book solve their own problems. They handle their own lives.
And I think maybe that's a little bit of personal philosophy of mine comes through that.
I can't solve the world's problems, but I can certainly keep control of my own life
and my belief in that I can pass on.
Which authors writing now do you enjoy? Just out of curiosity.
Oh, a lot of them. I read a lot, always between books.
I sit down and read 40 or 50 of the stretch because they pile up on my shelf.
I like Joseph Wampow. I have enjoyed Louis Thomas who did Medusa in the Snail and Lies in the Cell.
I enjoy Isaac Gassimoff. I enjoy Anne McCaffrey and a lot of Joleri Niven and CJ Cherry.
Not all of Fred Saberhagen, but certainly a lot of his work.
Blancy, some VHB Piper, LaTanis Lee. Now she writes fancy and I do read some of hers.
I've discovered a writer who's now dead, unfortunately, Van Gulick, who wrote a bunch of mysteries about a 7th century Chinese magistrate, Judge D.
I've been started collecting his books. Chelsea Quinn Yarborough I enjoy.
I have a lot of books, a lot of authors I like.
I'm rather Catholic in my reading taste. I read a lot of nonfiction as well as fiction, science books, sociology books.
This is just a trivia fact. It's not anything to the interview.
You mentioned Louis Thomas. I have a friend who lives in Connecticut who's working on an MBA.
In one of his business ethics courses, they had to read both the Louis Thomas books, which you wouldn't expect in a business course.
It's a little unexpected, yeah.
But it's encouraging.
The other great question I want to ask you, there are those that are bothered by a seemingly recent trend in that everybody's writing prequels and sequels.
In fact, the Hugo Awards, all the novels nominated were either prequels or sequels.
Some people are bothered by this. Other people don't care. Do you have any feelings on this?
Well, I started out thinking that I was going to write each one different.
And I may still end up doing a lot of that, you know, creating, rebuilding the world anew each summer by the book.
It's certainly easy if you already have the background there.
And in a sense, it's no worse than mainstream writers who are writing all out of the same world, aren't they?
And yet they get infinite stories out of that one particular world.
I think the readers, what's the word?
I mean, how many continual mystery characters are there?
They're detectives.
Mystery is replete with series characters.
And why do you think people watch series television?
Because they like to see these same characters over and over and over again.
They get hooked on a character.
I suppose it can be a little discouraging to think, well, gee, they're not after any new ideas or just after these one characters who, if they're in a series, they can't really change because they have to keep the same, but they're not the same characters anymore.
Oh dear. We're getting a buzz.
You hear a buzz?
Yeah.
Okay, we don't hear it over here, so apparently it's not getting on the tape.
Oh, okay.
Okay, go ahead and continue if you want.
It can be financially rewarding to have a series because people like a particular character, then you know you've got an audience every time you write a book about that particular character.
And it, I don't know, it'd be nice if each of the award-winning books was something that stood on itself instead of being parked in a series.
And maybe award-winning books should be, should be, but certainly the things that are voted by the fans like the hugos or the things that they want to read.
And while I think a writer should necessarily pander to public taste, if he wants to make a living, he's certainly got to write something that people want to read.
And if he has engaging characters and people like them, and why not write about them?
I've got people hounding me to write more Momma Maxwell and Janet Brill, and I have no objections to doing that.
There are good pair of characters to make a series because they don't have to change from book to book.
On the other hand, the book I'm writing now is, had carries within it the seeds for a sequel, but it wouldn't have the same characters in it.
It would simply be more of a story further on down the line.
I can't really blame readers for liking a series of books if they liked this particular book, why they want more of the same.
And I can't blame writers who want to make a living for giving them more of the same.
And I can't blame the writers. Readers for buying it and reading it.
I don't know that it's any kind of a degeneration in literature.
Those books may last, they may not.
I think a writer is an entertainer.
A writer is an entertainer.
And if he thinks that he's creating desolate prose with every line he struggles to put down,
and if he's writing for history, then he's probably got pretensions of grandeur.
If I write a book that people buy and read by buying, they give me my money, which I need.
And if they enjoy it by reading it, then I'm really happy.
I don't think I would write a book just for money, but certainly I want to write something that is fun for me to write,
and I want to write something that is fun for readers to read.
Okay, David, did you have a question?
Now the engineer wants to ask you a question himself.
Can you hear me all right?
Yes.
Okay, my question is about writing and writing technique.
When you start writing a story, do you develop your characters first or the storyline first?
Which comes first and which follows, and how does it progress into the full-blown story?
It's sometimes one way and sometimes the other.
Sometimes I have a character.
I'm trying to think of one in which I had a character first.
I know I have.
But I have had others where there was a story idea, and then I searched in that idea for the character who was most affected
so that I could have that character at the center.
Sometimes I make mistakes.
I was the captain in the book I'm writing right now before I realized that one of the characters I had as protagonists
didn't know a whole lot of things that it would increase tension if the audience knew.
Therefore I went back.
I had a character who just sort of wanted on the page.
He was going to be a bit character that I was interested in him, and I thought I'm going to do a book about him eventually.
And then it occurred to me that he knew the kind of things that would be interesting for the readers to know.
So I went back and made him the other protagonist for the book.
But other times I've had a character that I was interested in.
Oh, yeah.
House divided the woman who was the split personality.
I had her first and had worked out her character, and then I found a situation to put her in.
So sometimes it works one way and sometimes it works the other.
Sometimes I have a setting and I have a beautiful setting, then I have to figure out a story and characters to go with it.
I think stories start all kinds of ways.
Okay.
That's my list of questions.
Let's see. It's almost an hour and 15 minutes.
My goodness.
Okay, I'll become a fan again.
Yeah, I love the Mama Maxwell and Janet Brill stories, and I would hope to see them again.
And the reason I wanted to talk to you, I was just kind of accidentally stumbled on you when the first novel came out.
And bang, bang, bang, here came four novels.
And they've all been very good and very enjoyable.
And so that's the reason I wanted to talk to you.
Plus you seemed very accessible at the con.
So we appreciate getting to talk to you.
I hope.
I'm glad you like the line.
That's why I say writer is entertainer.
And if people don't enjoy reading my stuff, then I failed somewhere along the line, no matter how many, how much, how artistic the book might be.
I'm definitely going to do more with Mama Maxwell and Janet Brill.
I was going to do them next, but I have this sequel idea for this other book.
I think maybe it'll be next.
Let's see.
I had something.
Oh, yeah.
Your statement about writers being entertainers.
I have a feeling that's going to be one of the shows.
That's too good to pass up that when you were kind of at the end, getting to the end of that, that was, I think, quite revelatory.
And I agree.
I just never had thought of it that way.
But, uh, sure, sure, you'll have to go on strike so you can become a free agent or whatever.
Certainly.
The publishers have the best because there are a lot of people who want to be writers.
And so, uh, the competition is fierce.
Yeah, I would think so.
It would be nice if I, as an entertainer, I could pull down the same kind of salary that football entertainer pulls down, for instance.
Now, now we have...
One of these days maybe I'll get the best salary.
That's what I'm working for.
You have to know what's important in life.
And obviously football is, uh, it's even more important than the President of the United States.
I wouldn't be the President of the United States.
It's a no-win situation.
That's for sure.
David, any more questions?
No. Tell her this will probably be edited within two months and we'll be sending her copy tapes of the air program.
Okay, fine.
We'll send you a copy of the interview and then we'll also edit it with an...
No, no, no, we'll send her copy tapes of the program.
Well, yeah, I was going to get to that, yeah.
And then we will send you copies of the edited programs for your enjoyment.
And, uh...
I love hearing them.
Okay.
Sure appreciate your talking to us.
We enjoyed it.
And, uh, keep on writing.
We're out here and we read it and, uh, we'd like to see some more.
About six more chapters of this book to go, which I've got to get done by the first of March.
It is, you have it in by the first of April.
You'll find out what happened to those columns.
I would like to know.
Is this...are you going to...are most of your books going to appear paperback first, uh, or hardback, uh, first editions on down the line for writers?
I've never really understood how that works.
It's a lot easier to get published in paperbacks because let's face it, a hardback is expensive
and people are much more likely to put out $2.25 to $2.50 for something that looks interesting, uh, and that they might like.
They're going to have to be sure they're going to want it before they're going to put out $10 or $12 for it.
Um, the mass market media is paperback and it's much easier for...to get published in paperback.
And it's certainly easier to get your name spread around that way.
I think later perhaps, my agent is trying for some hardback editions and I would be...
I'd be loved to have some stuff picked up by the Science Fiction Book Club.
It hasn't happened yet.
I have some story ideas and proposals into my agent that she's trying for hardback.
She has a vampire novel of mine that she's trying for hardback.
But I have a feeling that when it comes out, it'll probably come out paperback.
Is it a vampire mystery novel?
It's a vampire cop mystery novel.
But what vampire police procedure novel?
One of the vampires in it is a cop and he's another unusual.
He's about five age and he's blonde and gray-eyed and he's Irish-American.
He's a little different than your normal vampire.
Well, you've got the corner on the market.
Oh, okay. You've got the corner on the market on police procedure novels and they are enjoyable.
So he might as well throw in everything.
Engineer has another question. Yes?
What sort of mythos is he using on the vampire? Can he go out there in the daylight?
Okay. Which of the vampire mythos is...
Whatever the plural is, are you using? Can he go out in the day?
Oh, yes. I picked up most of the things straight out of Dracula.
I went ahead and used that.
Except he goes out in the daytime but he feels miserable. He hates it.
He can subsist on any blood as long as it's blood.
Crosses don't bother him because he wasn't particularly religious growing up but...
He quits breathing in the presence of garlic.
It's like he's all the air in his lungs turned to concrete.
He can't go in, of course he isn't invited, but he finds a distinct handicap as a police officer.
He can go through...
He can go through walls. Now I might have to rewrite that.
There was one point where he goes through a solid wall.
Every place else he went through fight doors and so forth which he could have gone in.
He didn't really know how he went through. He just knew he did.
He didn't examine the procedure too closely because he didn't like being a vampire.
He didn't really want to get to know the whole thing too well.
Let's see what are some of the other things.
Disproportionate strength.
Disproportionate strength? Is that what you said?
Oh, yes.
Superhuman strength, I think.
Very disproportionate strength. Very strong sense of smell and very strong hearing.
And I wrote the book to be as realistic as possible.
Of course the reader knows right away, practically, that there's a vampire involved.
But he doesn't even catch on that she's a vampire when she's biting him.
He thinks she's really weird because I tried to think,
what would a normal everyday person think?
A person's glommed onto their throat that way.
And even when he's in the hospital and he's miserable in the daylight
and he feels much better at night and he's throwing up food
and his front teeth are coming loose and things like that.
He has to sit there and watch the Friday Fright Night movies
and watch Dracula on the movie before he starts to catch on what's going on.
You know?
Did you, you mentioned Saber Hagen, did you read his, or enjoy his Dracula novels?
Oh, very much.
I have all Chelsea Quinn Yardbrows too, but I haven't managed to read them yet.
They're sitting on the shelf waiting.
I understand they're quite good. I haven't read them yet either.
I have, I guess he's bringing out a fifth.
I have four of them and the fifth in the series, which is a modern day one, I guess.
But I've enjoyed the Fred Saber Hagen books very, very much.
And there's a couple of other vampire ones that have been, oh,
that's the Tanneth Lee had one that was very enjoyable.
Subella?
Was that Subella?
Yeah.
And there were a couple of others I read that weren't all that terrific.
But, yeah, I find vampires very fascinating.
I've also got the Vampire Tapestry, which is on my reading shelf too.
If the cop can carry warrants through the wall, I guess that would be quite a plus for him.
He could carry warrants.
Oh.
I don't know if he could do that or not.
Presumably his clothes would go with him, but I don't know about papers.
I don't think I ever had him carrying a solid object through at the point to which he was going through
and carrying solid objects. It's like a mesh gate or something.
That was when he was carrying his thermos bottle so he could fill it up with blood and take it home
until he'd have a couple of days supply and wouldn't have to hunt all the time.
If that doesn't make hard back, will that be a Del Ray book and come out in a science fiction package?
Unfortunately, it won't be a Del Ray because I was under contract to write that book.
And once it was turned in, they turned it down because Judy Lynn really isn't a fantasy editor.
And I don't know why she wanted, why she thought she wanted the book.
She was explaining why she turned it down.
And it sounded to me like her image of a vampire is the Hollywood image where they have to sleep underground
in a coffin at night and can't go out in the daylight at all.
And it sounded like she hadn't read any of the recent vampire books and she probably didn't sound like she'd read Dracula either
because Dracula went out in daylight. In fact, the more blood he drank, the better he felt.
And he was out there running around in daylight perfectly well.
He just couldn't change shape and things like that in the daylight.
Oh, my guy's not a shape changer either. And he does reflect in a mirror.
Makes it hard to shave if he can according to the engineer.
That's true.
Somebody teased him once.
He was saying he was allergic to garlic.
Somebody says, oh, how long have you been a vampire?
At which point he started to freak out and he realized that they were just teasing him.
And they asked him something about shaving and he said, well, the electric razor was a great boon to vampires.
Okay.
The engineer uses an electric razor so he appreciates that he says.
It's been very nice talking to you. Thanks again.
And we look forward to seeing what's coming out.
You'll hear from us with a little package of tapes one of these days.
Okay, you bet. Bye-bye now.